Traffic events (#290)
netbirdio/docs: src/pages/how-to/netflow.mdx

# Introduction

NetBird’s **Traffic Events** feature provides a high-level view of traffic flows between network peers and resources.
It captures connection events on the client (peer) side – for example, when `Peer A` connects to `Peer B` –
allowing administrators to observe how devices communicate across the NetBird network​.
The primary purpose of flow logging is to help network admins monitor network activity,
detect unusual or unauthorized connections, and troubleshoot connectivity issues in their NetBird mesh VPN​.
Unlike packet capture, **Traffic Events** record metadata about the traffic (addresses, ports, timestamps, etc.) rather than the contents,

> preserving privacy while still giving useful insight​.

Reviewer: It is not really about the mesh network. The user will have an impression that we support it on for p2p. We need to emphasise both cases: p2p and access to internal resources (maybe even crosslinking to Resources in the networks feature doc). I'd also emphasise more user to resource as this is the most common case for business

By focusing on client-side events, NetBird’s **Traffic Events** show what each peer is doing on the network.
This includes which peers or services it is contacting, over which protocols, and when.
Traffic Events are especially useful for verifying that access control policies are working as expected (e.g. confirming that a peer could reach an allowed resource,
or that blocked traffic wasn’t forwarded).
In essence, they provide an audit trail of network connections in your NetBird environment,
helping administrators ensure the network is being used according to policy and to quickly identify
any anomalies or needed configuration changes.

# Data Collected on Peers

When enabled, a NetBird peer will record metadata for each network flow that it participates in. The data collected typically includes:

> * **Timestamp/Duration**: When the flow started and ended (or how long it lasted).

Reviewer: We don't have duration

Author: fixed

* **Source and Destination IP Addresses**: The IP of the peer (source) and the IP of the remote endpoint (destination). For peer-to-peer traffic, these will be the NetBird network IPs (e.g. 100.x.x.x addresses of each peer). For traffic to an external resource (like a private server or subnet), the destination might be an IP in that remote network​.
* **Source and Destination Ports**: The network ports used by the connection (for TCP/UDP flows). ICMP flows will be identified by ICMP type rather than ports​.
* **Protocol**: The protocol of the traffic, such as TCP, UDP, or ICMP​.
* **Direction**: Whether the flow was incoming or outgoing​.

> * **Volume of Data**: The amount of data transferred, often measured in number of packets and bytes sent/received for the duration of the flow​.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Volume of Data**: The amount of data transferred, measured in number of packets and bytes sent/received for the duration of the flow​.
```

Author: done

Crucially, only `metadata` is logged, not the actual payload of the packets.
NetBird does not record contents of communications – for example, it might log that a peer made an `HTTPS` connection

> to an IP, but it will `NOT` log any `usernames`, `passwords`, or data exchanged inside that connection.

Reviewer: not sure if we need to explain this and use username and passwords

Author: removed

For instance, DNS query traffic is not collected by default.
Similarly, NetBird’s own control traffic (management, keepalives, etc.) is not recorded in Traffic Events.
The focus is on user-initiated network flows relevant to your access policies.

# Kernel Mode vs Userspace Mode

NetBird leverages WireGuard for its tunneling, and it can operate in two modes on client devices: kernel mode or userspace mode.
In kernel mode, NetBird utilizes the operating system’s WireGuard kernel module (when available) for handling encryption and routing.
This offers very efficient performance with low overhead, as the heavy lifting is done inside the OS kernel.
NetBird is designed to take advantage of kernel-mode WireGuard whenever possible for direct peer-to-peer connections​.
If the kernel module isn’t available or if the platform doesn’t support it (for example, Windows, or certain BSD-based systems),
NetBird falls back to a userspace implementation of WireGuard (running in the NetBird agent process).
Userspace mode may introduce slightly higher CPU usage or latency since packets are handled in the application layer rather than the kernel,
but it ensures compatibility across all environments.

> **[CHECK] We need to explain what's the how the Traffic Events differ in kernel mode vs userspace mode.**

Reviewer 2: There are a few limitations currently, but I don't know if we need to document them right now. If we don't, I'd remove the whole section

Author: @mlsmaycon wdyt?

# Log Retention

> NetBird do not store Traffic Events indefinitely; instead, we follow a retention policy to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NetBird does not store Traffic Events indefinitely; instead, we follow a retention policy to
```

balance storage use and privacy. By default, flow log data is retained for 24 hours on the management system,
after which older records are automatically deleted.

However, while in experimental mode, logs are retained for **48 hours**.
Additionally, please note that the current API returns a maximum of **50,000 events**.
We are actively working on expanding this limit in the coming days to support larger datasets and increased usage.

# Log Shipping

To enhance monitoring and centralized analysis, we support shipping Traffic Events to external logging solutions.
Currently, DataDog is the only supported destination for log shipping.
This integration allows you to seamlessly forward Traffic Events from NetBird to DataDog,

> where you can leverage advanced dashboards, alerting, and analytics to gain deeper insights into your network activity.

Reviewer: It is not only datadog

Author: fixed

# Use Cases

This section outlines common scenarios in which Traffic Events are useful, explaining what administrators can glean in each case.
We’ll also illustrate some scenarios with examples and screenshots of log data where applicable.

## 1. Peer-to-Peer Connections

When two NetBird peers communicate directly, a flow log entry is generated on the peer that initiated the connection.
This covers basic peer-to-peer traffic such as one workstation pinging another, an SSH session from one server to another,

> or any application data exchanged between two peers over the NetBird.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or any application data exchanged between two peers over NetBird.
```

The log will show the source peer’s NetBird IP and the destination peer’s NetBird IP, along with the protocol and ports used.

#### **1.1. Example of a flow log entry for a TCP connection between two peers.**
![NetBird Local Peer](/docs-static/img/how-to-guides/traffic-events/tcp.png)
In the above example, a peer named `Nevada Windows` opened a TCP connection from source port `52480` to another peer named `acltest` on destination port `80`.
Each peer would log the flow from its perspective – typically, the initiator peer `Peer A` logs it as an outgoing connection and
the responder peer `acltest` logs it as an incoming connection.

#### **1.2. Example of a flow log entry for an UDP connection between two peers.**

![NetBird Local Peer](/docs-static/img/how-to-guides/traffic-events/udp.png)
In the case of UDP traffic between peers, the flow log will similarly record the source/dest IPs and ports and label the protocol as UDP.

> UDP flows might not have a clear “end” (since UDP is connectionless), so they may be reported with a duration corresponding to the period of activity or on a rolling interval.\

Reviewer: We have no duration

Author: fixed

#### 1.3. Example of a flow log entry for an ICMP connection between two peers.

![NetBird Local Peer](/docs-static/img/how-to-guides/traffic-events/icmp.png)
ICMP flows (like a ping) will appear with protocol ICMP in the logs. For a ping, you’d see the two peers’ IPs and the fact it was ICMP;
if packet/byte counting is on, you might see a couple of packets (an echo request and reply) recorded.

Peer-to-peer log entries help answer questions like:
Did peer A communicate with peer B? Over which protocol and port? How much data was exchanged?
For instance, if a developer says they couldn’t reach a service on another machine,
an admin can check the Traffic Events on the source peer to see if a TCP flow to the destination was attempted or established.
If the log shows the connection and bytes flowing, the network was fine and the issue might be elsewhere; if no flow is logged,

> the traffic never left the source peer (perhaps due to ACL blocking or a local issue).

Reviewer 2: > perhaps due to ACL blocking

I'd drop this part

In NetBird, you can define resources (in Access Control) that are single hosts (single IP addresses) which a peer should be allowed to reach.
For example, you might have an on-premises service at IP `192.168.0.201` that is not itself running NetBird,
but one of your NetBird peers `Routing Peer A` is in that network and can route traffic to it.
Another peer `Peer A` somewhere else is granted access to that host through NetBird.
When `Peer A` tries to connect (e.g. HTTPS on port 443) to the host resource `192.168.0.201` the traffic will go through `Routing Peer A`
(which acts as a routing peer for that resource).

Traffic Events are extremely useful here to understand each step:

* On `Peer A`’s log, you would see an outgoing flow with destination `192.168.0.201`:443 (for example) over TCP.
The source would be `Peer A`’s NetBird IP and source port, destination the host’s IP and port 443.
This confirms that Peer A attempted to reach the server.
* On `Routing Peer A`’s log, you will see the related flow: coming from `Peer A`
(`Peer A`’s NB IP to `192.168.0.201` on port 443). Routing `Peer A` essentially bridges the two networks,

> so it sees an incoming encrypted flow and forwards the traffic internally.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
so it sees an incoming flow and forwards the traffic internally.
```

Not relevant on this layer

Using these logs, an admin can verify that the traffic is indeed passing through:
For instance, if `Peer A` reports a flow to `192.168.0.201` but the server isn’t responding,
you could check `Routing Peer A`’s logs to ensure it forwarded the traffic. If `Routing Peer A`’s log shows
no flow out to `192.168.0.201`, that might indicate a routing issue on Routing Peer A

> (maybe IP forwarding is disabled or firewall on Routing Peer A blocked it).

Reviewer 2: I would drop the IP forwarding and routing issue parts. The flow might still show up

Author: done

On the other hand, if `Routing Peer A`’s log shows it forwarded to `192.168.0.201`, then the issue might be at the server itself.
Traffic Events thus help pinpoint where a breakdown occurs in peer-to-resource scenarios.

**Another Example**: Imagine DNS is disabled on a printer, and a user’s laptop `Peer A` tries to ping the printer’s IP
via a NetBird routing peer. The logs on `Peer A` would show an ICMP flow to the printer’s IP;
the routing peer’s logs would show the traffic coming from the laptop and going to the printer.
If the ping fails, you could see whether the flow reached the printer or not.
All of this without capturing packets – the flow records give a concise summary of what happened.
In summary, for peer-to-host resource events, look at the initiating peer’s log for an outbound flow to the host’s IP,
and the routing peer’s log for the corresponding transit.
These flows confirm that NetBird is correctly carrying traffic to specific single-IP resources in your network.

> #### 2.2. Peer-To-Subnet Connection

Reviewer: To a network resource maybe?

Author: fixed

Similar to the above, this scenario deals with a peer accessing an entire subnet (range of IPs) via a routing peer.

> NetBird allows administrators to define network routes (or the newer “Networks” feature) where a Linux peer acts as a gateway to a subnet (for example, an office `LAN 10.0.5.0/24`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NetBird allows administrators to define network routes (or the newer “Networks” feature) where a peer acts as a gateway to a subnet (for example, an office `LAN 10.0.5.0/24`).
```

if `Peer A` (remote laptop) connects to `10.0.5.100` (an internal server in the subnet),
`Peer A`’s logs will list a flow with destination `10.0.5.100` (and whatever port/protocol).
* On the routing peer’s side (the peer that has access to that subnet),
you’ll again see the flow coming from `Peer A`’s NetBird IP out to the `10.0.5.x` address.

One thing to note is that when a subnet is allowed, a peer might generate many flow log entries if it scans 
or communicates with multiple hosts in that subnet. Each distinct connection (to each IP and port)
is a separate flow record. The logs can thus help you map out which internal hosts a remote peer is talking to.
For example, you might see peer-a accessing `10.0.5.25 (file server)` on `TCP 445`, and also `10.0.5.100` on `TCP 3389 (RDP)`.
This tells you which services are being used.

Traffic Events in this scenario can highlight if any unexpected access is happening.
Perhaps a peer is only supposed to use a database, but you see flows to a domain controller’s IP – that could be a red flag to investigate.
Conversely, if a user complains they can’t access anything in the subnet, you could check the logs:

> if absolutely no flows to that subnet appear in their peer log, maybe the ACL isn’t applied or their client isn’t attempting the connection at all.

Reviewer 2: Drop the ACL part, we don't have outbound ACLs

Author: done

#### 2.3. Peer-To-Domain Connection

![NetBird Local Peer](/docs-static/img/how-to-guides/traffic-events/domain.png)
![NetBird Local Peer](/docs-static/img/how-to-guides/traffic-events/domain_resource.png)

NetBird also supports defining resources by domain name – for example,
an access policy might allow a peer to reach example.com or *.corp.internal.
In these cases, the NetBird client will handle domain name resolution (often through NetBird’s DNS features)
and then allow traffic to the resulting IP addresses if they match the domain policy.
Traffic Events will capture the actual IP connections made, but it’s important to understand how domain-based rules reflect in the logs.

When a peer initiates a connection to an allowed domain (say, intranet.corp.internal), the following happens:

> * **[CHECK]** The peer resolves the domain to an IP (using either the NetBird embedded DNS or system DNS, depending on setup).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The peer resolves the domain to an IP using the routing peer's embedded resolver.
```

> * **[CHECK]** The connection proceeds to that IP over the tunnel. The flow log on the peer will show a connection to that IP address (since that’s what ultimately happens on the network layer).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The connection proceeds to that IP over the tunnel. The flow log on the peer will show a connection to that IP address (since that’s what ultimately happens on the network layer).
```

> By default, the Network Flow Log records only the resolved IP address, not the original domain name.
> This approach aligns with NetBird’s default behavior of not logging DNS queries to maintain privacy.

Reviewer 2: We might change that soon, then we'd not only have the resource  but also the resolved IP. Let's drop the part

```suggestion
```

on UDP port 123 (NTP). Each of those flows corresponds to the domain resource. 

## 3. Site-to-Site Connections

In a site-to-site setup, NetBird connects two or more networks (sites) each with a routing peer.
For example, an AWS VPC network and an on-prem network could be linked via their respective NetBird peers,
so that machines in each site can talk to each other through the NetBird tunnel
(often without each machine running NetBird – the routing peers relay traffic).
Traffic Events become a powerful tool to monitor and troubleshoot this inter-site traffic.

Consider two sites: Site A (with subnet 10.1.0.0/16, routing peer = Peer-A) and Site B (with subnet 192.168.1.0/24, routing peer = Peer-B).
NetBird is configured so that each site’s subnet is accessible to the other via the respective routing peers.
Now suppose a host in Site A (10.1.0.50) is trying to reach a host in Site B (192.168.1.75) on some service.

Here’s how the Traffic Events play out:

* Peer-A’s logs (routing peer at Site A): Peer-A will log an incoming flow from 10.1.0.50 (a host on its LAN)
going to 192.168.1.75 via the NetBird tunnel. Actually, since 10.1.0.50 isn’t a NetBird peer,

> Peer-A might log the flow as unknown but destined to 192.168.1.75 through Peer-B.

Reviewer 2: Unknown  shouldn't happen in this scenario, let's drop this part

Author: done

* Peer-B’s logs (routing peer at Site B): Correspondingly, Peer-B will log an incoming flow from Peer-A (over NetBird)
destined to 192.168.1.75, and then an outgoing flow to 192.168.1.75 on its local network.

> If the Site B host responds, Peer-B logs the return traffic coming from 192.168.1.75 going back to Peer-A over NetBird.

Reviewer 2: Return traffic is part of the first flow, let's drop this part.

Author: done
